Notes:
      The visualizations should take 5 min (the app + carlos piece)
      Everything else should take 5 min
      canva -> https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/paradisejoy/top-hits-spotify-from-20002019/data 
To Do
      make 3-4 sentences about each visualization -> first should be longest, then getting shorter for next few



Presentation Script ver Zetaζ

-----Intro----- Jackie
      Hello and welcome to our presentation, Spotify Data Visualizations. Our group studied trends in four music genres from between 1998 and 2020, then created an interactive website to display our findings. Hello, I'm Jacqueline (everyone introduces themselves)
      We chose this topic because music is an integral part of society that reflects and influences culture. Our presentation is a small glimpse into some of the music trends that have occurred in the past two decades. 

-----Data Sources----- Jackie
      We used 'Top Hits Spotify from 2000-2019' from Kaggle for our analysis. This dataset has statistics of the top 2,000 tracks from between 1998 and 2020. It contains 18 columns that break down each track with traits such as song duration, tempo (aka beats per minute), and loudness (measured in decibles)

-----Project Goals----- Jackie
      To begin, our overall objective was to analyse the dataset for any notable patterns and trends. What was the data saying by itself before we looked for specific metrics? Did anything stand out? We used the variables provided, such as speechiness, acousticness, energy, etcetera and grouped them by genre. Then, they were charted by year.
      Our question was, how did the genres change over time, and what changed? Was it loudness? Energy? Danceability? Pop songs from 2000 and 2020 have very distinct styles. While 'style' isn't measurable, factors such as loudness and duration are, and can be charted over time
      We were also interested in the content of the songs and how it changes through the years. Are song durations changing? What about songs being explicit? Between genres, which were explicit? Which had longer songs?
      Our last goal was to create interactive visualizations to show off our findings. 

-----Considerations and Limitations----- Madison
      Nevertheless, the data is imperfect and its limitations should be acknowledged.
      Firstly, the data is limited in size. The dataset contains 2000 songs, which may not be representative of the entire Spotify catalog. Its also not spread evenly across time. Generalizations should be made cautiously.
      The dataset also groups many genres together, and may not cover all genres or sub-genres, potentially limiting the diversity of the analysis. For example, differences in rock subgenres like pop and metal are lumped together. 
      Culture also shifts as music changes and genres evolve. The analysis has to be mindful of cultural shifts and how they may impact characteristics of songs over the years. 
      Metadata limitations should also be considered. Some aspects of a song's appeal, such as lyrics or cultural context, may not be adequately captured by the provided metadata. This could limit the depth of analysis.
      Lastly, The dataset might not capture individual user preferences or how social media influences a song's or genre's popularity

-----Data Process and Cleanup----- Josh
      The data was stored and extracted from a SQL database. SQLite was used to manipulate the data and create the queries needed for analysis and visualization. The data was [ extraction from Kaggle ] and set up [ explanation ]. Then was cleaned by dropping duplicates, grouping the data by genre, and [ other cleanup methods ]
      As for the HTML side, we decided on using Chart.js and Axios because [ insert good quality about each of them ]. Flask was used for querying because [ reason ]
      As for the visualizations, each chart is run through its own application [ explanation about the applications ]

----Visualizations----- Carlos
      The visualizations were created through their own applications and established through Chart.js by [ explain about chart.js ]
      Each chart is an interactive bar chart or line graph that display [ features ]. These charts use SQL in Python via [ reason ]
      Chart.js is a library that creates visualizations and features [ insert notable features ]. Axios is another library that pulls the request through an interactive API route

---Application One--- Josh
      The dataset had 15 different music genres listed, however the analysis was narrowed to focus on only four genres. These are rock, pop, electronic, and hip-hop. They were chosen because [ reason ]
      The first visualization displays the average of each metric for each genre across time. Users select a genre, then which metric they'd like to see. Being able to track these averages through time allows us to see the physical changes in how songs are as genres evolve. 
      Some metrics, such as song duration, have  over time (show song duration)

---Application Two--- Madison
      The second visualization charts the count of explicit songs over time.

---Application Three--- Jackie
      The last visualiation tracks song duration over time. Over time, hip-hop, rock, and pop have all declined around 250 seconds (or about 4 minutes) to around 200 seconds (about 3 minutes 20 seconds)

---Conclusion--- Carlos


      _> what metrics want to talk about
music evolves and changes, what is 'pop' in the past is relative to its time -> show changes like duration
can track evolutions in music over the past two decades -> music branches into different genres, or different genres are popular
pop ->  a contemporary form of music that appeals to a very wide audience -> genre shifts from decade to decade 80s rock to 90s boybands 

-----Visualization 2----
interactive #2
genre : count of explicit songs over time 
might reflect popularity of certain genres over time -> 


-----Visualization 3----
song duration over time
overall songs get shorter
electronic has outliers -> rest are steady down trends 


